
Opioids are drugs used for pain relief and management but they can also be used to induce euphoria (ie feeling high). The epidemic of opioid-related overdose deaths and related harms began in Canada in 2016 and is still ongoing. This epidemic resulted in over 30,000 opioid-related overdose deaths since 2016 and is a huge burden on the healthcare system, just directly from opioid-related poisoning there have been over 34,000 opioid-related (excluding Quebec) and over 28,000 emergency medical services responses to suspected opioid-related overdose in 2022 alone. It is important also to recognize that the harms of the opioid epidemic are more than just opioid-related overdose deaths. This crisis is very complex with many factors affecting it but two of the main contributors to it are 1) illegal opioids: since the illicit drug market has become contaminated with strong opioids such as fentanyl (will be referred to as illicit opioids) and 2) prescription opioids are also contributing to the crisis since they can be misused. As a result, through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) and other related programs, the government is funding projects that support people who use drugs and aim to mitigate the harms and deaths resulting from the opioid overdose epidemic based on scientific evidence.

Three of these interventions are:

1)  **Increased access to overdose education and naloxone dispensation (Naloxone)**: Naloxone is a drug that reverses an opioid overdose and is proven to be safe. This intervention aims to distribute 58,000 naloxone kits across Canada and provide training and awareness on opioid-related overdose response (funding for it is 20 million dollars).
2)  **Opioid prescription guidelines**: In 2017 stricter prescription guidelines were introduced for non-cancer chronic pain patients. These guidelines include 4 strong recommendations and 6 weak recommendations that aim to optimize non-opioid therapy and restrict it to patients who do not have a history of substance use.
3)  **Safer supply**: which refers to services that aim to provide prescribed medications as a safer alternative to toxic illegal drug supply to people who are at high risk of overdose. This differs from agonist treatment (OAT) in terms of aims, population it serves and services. While OAT aims to treat substance use disorder and mitigate the effects of withdrawal by the use of different medications, Safer supply services aim to mitigate the harmful effects of contaminated opioids from the illicit drug market, it is more flexible and does not aim to eventually stop drug use.  

This project aims to evaluate the future economic impact of these interventions by conducting a cost-benefit analysis to examine the difference in healthcare costs between the interventions and their projected effects on reducing opioid-related deaths and other important health outcomes. This project aims to provide evidence-based on the currently available data on the effectiveness of these interventions.

We used an open cohort Markov model 
